Katie Sickles
LING 567
Lab2

Icelandic, Íslenska
Language Code: isl

Pronouns:
	
	Pronouns in Icelandic vary by person, number, gender, case
and familiarity. I have a chart below representing the pronouns
of the language. I have given all the cases for 1st person, and
used just the nominative case for the other persons.
	
	1st Person:
	
		Singular	Familiar Pl.	Polite Pl.
	
nom.	ég			við				vér
acc.	mig			okkur			oss
dat.	mér			okkur			oss
gen. 	mín			okkar			vor

	2nd Person:
	
nom.	þú			þið				þér

	3rd Person (nominative only):
	
		Singular	Plural
		
masc.	hann		þeir
fem.	hún			þær
neut.	það			þau		

	These pronouns have to match the verbs in agreement 
with the number and person. Such as the example below:

	Ég hoppa
	I  jump.1sg
	
	*Við hoppa
	 We   jump.1sg
	 
Determiners:

	Icelandic does not have a indefinite article, only the
definite one. There are two different kinds of the definite
article: a free one, and a suffixed one.

	Free:		hinn gódi maður
				the good man
		
	Suffixed:	gódi maður-inn
				the good man
			
	The free aricle can only appear if there is an adjective in
the sentence. If there is no adjective present, the suffixed
version has to be used:

	Maðurinn elskar mig
	the man loves me
	
	*Hinn maður elskar mig
	the man loves me
	
	The articles also have agreement with case, gender and 
number. This is true of both free and suffixed articles. The chart 
below illustrates some of the different suffixed articles:

		Gender	Singular	Plural
	
nom.	masc.	hestur-inn	hestar-nir
acc.	masc.	hest-inn	hesta-na
dat.	masc.	hesti-num	hestu-num
nom.	fem.	kinn-in		kinnar-nar
acc.	fem.	kinn-ina	kinnar-nar
dat.	fem.	kinn-inni	kinnu-num

	If there is a common noun without a determiner, it has the
same interpretation as the indefinite article of "a" from English.

Case:

	Icelandic has four cases: nominative, accusative, dative, and
genitive. The nominative case is generally used for the subject of
a sentence as in English and accusative is used as the object of
transitive verbs. There are also some verbs that require the subject
to be accusative as well. Here are some examples:

	Ég elska manninn
	I.NOM like the man.ACC
	
	*Ég líka maðurinn
	I.NOM like the man.NOM
	
	Mig dreymdi draum
	I.ACC dreamt a dream.ACC
	
	The dative case is most often used in indirect objects,
but there are verbs that have the direct object as dative. Genitive
case is mostly used in possesives, but is also used in measurement.
	The cases in Icelandic have these distributions and must remain
in the proper distribution to form grammatical sentences.

Agreement:

	There is very strong agreement in Icelandic. So far it has been
used in almost all of the categories above. Gender, number, and person
have to agree for determiners and their nouns. Number and person have 
to agree for verbs and their pronouns or nouns.

	Maðurinn elskar mig
	the man loves me

	*Maðurin elskar mig
	the.FEM man.MASC loves me
	
Adjectives:

	Unlike English, the adjectives in Icelandic have case and number.
These also have to follow agreement with their nouns. They also appear
right before the noun they are modifying. The chart shows some of the
strong forms of the adjective "fagur"-beautiful, fair.

		Singular	
		
		Masc.	Fem.	Neut.
nom.	fagur	fögur	fagurt
acc.	fagran	fagra	fagurt

		Plural
		
		Masc.	Fem.	Neut.
nom.	fagrir	fagrar	fögur
acc.	fagra	fagrar	fögur

These strong forms are used mostly with indeterminate nouns. However, there
are also weak forms that are used with definite article. For example:

	rauðer hunder
	a red dog
	
	rauði hunderinn
	the red dog	
	
	*hinn rauðer hunder
	the red.STONG dog
	
Coordination:

	The coordinating conjuction, "and", in Icelandic is used much in the same 
way as the English "and". The word "og" is inserted between to sentences or NPs
to connect them:

	hunder og köttur
	dog and cat
	
	Kötturinn elskar hundinn og hunderinn elskar köttinn
	The cat loves the dog and the dog loves the cat
	
Word Order:

	Icelandic is a SVO language. The verb will almost always be the second idea
of the sentence. The exception to this is in yes/no question (which will be
discussed later). If the sentence contains an auxiliary verb, this verb is placed
before the main verb.

	Konan elskar hann
	The woman loves him
	
	Konan hann elskar
	*The woman him loves
	
	Konan getur hoppa
	The woman can jump
	
Negation:

	To negate the sentence in Icelandic, the verb is negatated with a negative
adverb "ekki". This adverb is added after the auxiliary verb if an auxiliary is
present. If not, it is put after the main verb unless the object is a pronoun in
which case, the adverb is added after the pronoun object.

	Ég get ekki hoppa
	I can't jump
	
	Ég hoppa ekki
	I don't jump
	
	Ég elska hann ekki
	I don't love him
	
Yes/no Questions:

	To ask a yes/no question in Icelandic, the word order is changed. The new 
order is VSO for these types of questions. All other contrainsts, such as case
agreement must still be followed to create a grammatical sentence.

	Borðar þú matinn?
	Eat you food?
	Do you eat food?
	
	*þú borðar matinn?
	you eat food?
	
Imperatives:
	
	There is a special imperative tense in Icelandic that is used in command
sentences. In its usage, unlike English, the pronoun is often not dropped of
(ie "come you!"). Below is the imperative conjugation for "jump"

	þú	hoppa
	við	hoppum
	þið	hoppið
	
	Hoppa!
	Jump
	
	Hoppa þú!
	Jump (you)!
	
	When negation is used, it is possible to use the infinival form instead of
the imperative.

	Ekki að hoppar!
	Don't jump!
	
Modals:

	The modals are auxiliry verbs in Icelandic. The are placed befor the main
verb in standard sentence order. In a matrix yes/no question, they are placed
at the beginning of the sentence, followed by the subject. Below is the
conjugation of "can":

	ég	get
	þú	getur
	hann	getur
	við	getum
	þið	getið
	þeir	geta

	Hann getur hoppa
	He can jump
	
	Getur hann hoppa?
	Can he jump?
	
Final Note: In this write-up, I am still in the process of learning the grammar
	of Icelandic. There many times when writing this and the testsuite I thought
	a sentence was grammatical and later found out it was not. I am pretty sure
	that what I have represented now has the correct grammatical judgements, but
	as I am not a native speaker, I have yet to do more research to guarantee
	that the judgements are correct.

	

	
