Sentential Negation
Italian negates sentences with an adverb that modifies the verb phrase.  It comes before the verb in the sentence.  This is done by creating an adverb that is posthead - and that modifies a verb with an unfulfilled subject and a fulfilled comps list.  This was provided with the script and works with everything except imperatives.

Non so.  (I don't know)
Non mangi-o la pasta.  (I don't eat the staple+food)

I can eat glass

Potere (can) is a modal in Italian.  It takes a verb in the infinite
form as its complement.  It then associates the verb's lexical top
with the first argument of its KeyRel.  I first needed to create an
infinitive form.  I created a form 'inf' in addition to 'base' and
'imp'.  I then created a lexical rule that would allow a regular verb
to become an infinitive verb by adding the appropriate ending (are,
ere or ire).  I also added modals volere (want) and devere (should).

Devo dorm-ire
I should sleep

Since the argrument optionality marker can only come at the end of an infinite verb, I changed the lexical rules that license argument optionality to only verbs of the base form.  I then created a new argument optionality rule that would allow adding the arguments to the end of the verb.  Since this also applies to imperatives, I put both 'inf' and 'imp' verb forms under a 'non-base' verb form.  I also had to change the order that the rules apply in because the dative argument marker applies first and then the accusative marker.  This was actually easier since the dative marker only had to check to see if there were two arguments and the accusative marker only had to check to see if the first argument was case accusative.

Posso d-are il libro a lui
Posso d-are-lo a lui
Posso d-are-gli il libro
Posso d-are-gli-lo

In Italian the modal can also take all of the verb's arguments and add an argument optionality marker on itself.  Even though I have received significant help from the teacher on this, I did not have time to complete this.  It is semantic sugar, and there will be at least one parse for the machine translation extravaganza.  These sentences should also parse, but don't

Lo-posso d-are a lui
Gli-posso d-are il libro
Gli-lo-posso d-are

It doesn't hurt me
The best translation of this sentence is 'Non mi-f-a male'  (It doesn't hurt me.)  However, when I tried to generate from the semantics I got 'Non f-a male' (It doesn't do poorly.) as an alternative.  It got this because when I implemented the argument optionality, I said that all verbs could drop one of its arguments with a definite interpretation.  This is not the case.  Dropping 'mi' changes the verb 'farsi' to the verb 'fare'.  Dropping an argument in a reflexive verb changes the verb.  The verbs are actually listed separetly in the dictionary.  A clearer example could be the dropping of the object in the verb 'chiamarsi'.  "Mi chiamo Luigi' means 'My name is Luigi', but 'Chiamo Luigi' means 'I call Luigi'.  It doesn't matter how obvious it is that you are calling yourself, it cannot be interpretted with the definite interpretation.

In order to fix this, I would have to add a different type of verb for reflexives.  These verbs would not allow a definite argument optionality and would require that its object would be a pronoun. For now, we will just have to pretend that 'farsi' is the same thing as 'fare'.  

Italian is the language of love (Sample sentences for the extravaganza)
posso mangi-are il vetro
io posso mangi-are il vetro
non mi-f-a male
non mi-duole
d-a-mi-lo
Dio ti-am-a
Dio sempre mi-aiut-a
il studente domand-a se posso d-are-gli i libri nuov-i
non so
ved-o una ragazza bell-a 
domand-o se possiamo mangi-are una cosa piccol-a
mangi-amo la pasta
dic-o che posso d-are-le il sole
Baci-a-mi bene
la-baci-o
Lei piang-e e dic-e che mi-am-a
oggi non posso dorm-ire
so che am-o questa ragazza

Translations
I can eat glass
I can eat glass
It doesn't hurt me
It doesn't hurt me
Give it to me
God loves you
God always helps me
The student asks if I can give him the new books
I don't know
I see a beautiful girl
I ask if we can eat something small
We eat staple+food
I say that I can give her the sun
Kiss me well
I kiss her
She cries and says that she loves me
Today I cannot sleep
I know that I love this girl
