CLEANUP

For clean up tasks, I did the fixes you suggested with my Lab 8 grade. I removed the redundancy from my verb lex rules, by moving the constraints on person and tense to supertype rules. I made a FORM feature "inflec" to be a supertype of imp and fin and then made the root condition FORM inflec to keep infinitives from showing up as main clause verbs in generation.  I also tried to clean up the TDL so that it was more readable.  



To get the imperatives to parse correctly (and not allow other verbs
to go through the imperative rule) I did away with the imperative
rule, and made the imperatives INFLECTED +.  I made all the other
verbs INFLECTED - in the lexicon. This got rid of a lot of other
problems in my grammar which were caused by overapplying the
imperative rule. Now sentences like "kàawoo ruwaa!" (Bring water!)
will parse, and other sentences won't generate sentences without PAC
inflection (like infinitives).


I normalized all my CASE values, so they would be more understandable
(i.e. acc rather than dobj).  I got case-marking adpositions to work
by changing the ditransitive-verb-lex to take a HEAD +np as its first
complement.  I also made all common-nouns CASE nom+acc.  That way, the
only things appearing as indirect objects are nouns preceded by a
case-marker, or dative pronouns.  An example of a case-marker would be
"yaaròo yaa-sàyaa wà maalàminsù littaafìi", (the boy bought the
teacher a book, where "wà" is marking teacher "maalàminsù" as the
indirect object).

The definiteness-suffix/no-suffix rules were broken, because first person pronouns are underspecified for gender.  Both masc/fem rules were applying, and this was causing extra generated sentences.  I'm not actually sure which ending (m/f/pl) would apply to first person pronouns (if any).  To avoid applying the rules to these pronouns, I constrained the definiteness    I also added INFLECTED - to all my nouns and pronouns, to force them to go through either the definite or indefinite lexical rules.  (see "I can eat glass", "naa-iyà cî gìlâs".  The generation doesn't include definiteness suffixes).

I misread what my reference grammar said, and I thought that auxiliaries required subjunctive inflection.  It turns out they can take any inflection, so I took off the constraint requiring subjunctive.

I changed my head-opt-subject-phrase (which only functions with the
sentence-final question marker) so that it would only take a main
clause verb, or in other words a non-head-dtr with an inflected verb
(not infinitive).  I added constraints on my head-opt-subj-phrase so
it would only work with a verb with FORM fin.  I also fixed the
coordination of NPs so that the case of the coodinated phrase is the
same as both its daughters.  Now the CASE nom pronoun "I and the boy
went to the market" (nii dà yaaròo mun-jee kàasuwaa) will parse, but
the CASE dat won't (minì dà yaaròo mun-jee kàasuwaa).


Finally, I fixed the overgeneration in many of my ditransitive sentences.  I added a constraint to my head-comps-phrase that required it's daughter to have SPR <>.  This got rid of my remaining extra parses by forcing all NPs to go through the bare-np-phrase rule.  Most of the overgeneration was caused by the bare-np-rule being applied allowed complex structures like coordinated subjects with indirect objects to generate. (see "shii dà d`àalìbai sun-fad`àa matà ta" , "He and the students told it to her.", as well as "mùtûm yaa-gayàa manà cêwaa yaa-sàyaa mootàa", "He told us that he bought a car")

TRANSFER RULES

I was not able to get translation working. I'm not quite sure what's wrong, but the gender and PRO filter rules aren't stripping those features.

Besides adding PRO to the features stripped away, I added the optional pronoun insertion rule to translate between Hausa and languages without subject pro-drop.
TEST SUITES
Lab 8 -
- Coverage: 69%
- Overgeneration 12.8%

Lab 9 -
- Coverage: 66.7%
- Overgeneration 6.4%

The decrease in coverage is due to removing subjunctive from my grammar.  I had subjunctive examples contrasting with imperatives, so these no longer parsed.


EXAMPLE sentences

I can eat glass.  It doesn't hurt me.
 "naa-iyà cî gìlâs"
 "bàa yaa-cùutaa ni ba"

1. sunàa-fàafaràa kàr~ee
"They are chasing the dog"

2. bàa yaarinyàa taa-fàad`ì ba
"It is not the case that the girl fell"

3."shii dà d`àalìbii sun-d`agàa"
"he and the student left"

4."yaaròo zâi-baa wà likità littaafìi gòobe"
"The boy will give the teacher a book tomorrow"

5."mùtûm yaa-gayàa manà cêwaa yaa-sàyaa mootàa saabuwaa."
"The man told us that he bought a new car."

6. "taa-iyà ganii gidaa"
"She can see the house"


