Ryan Mattson
5-15-05
LING 567
Lab 6 Write Up

Interrogatives and Imperatives in Finnish

Matrix interrogative clauses in Finnish are typically created by
inverting the verb and the subject and inflecting the verb with
a -ko/-kO (where the capital o represents the fronted o, usually
marked with an umlaut; this vowel fronting occurs based on vowel
harmony) suffix, which is probably a clitic.

A typical matrix declarative looks like

1) Me     pelkAAmme   tomaattit
   we-nom fear-1p-pl tomato-acc
   we fear tomatoes

The interrogative corollary to this would be the following

2) PelkAAmmeko      me     tomaattit?
   fear-1p-pl-ques we-nom tomato-acc
   Do we fear tomatoes? / We fear tomatoes?

An intransitive verb works in the same way, like the following

3a) MinA  kAvelen
    I-nom walk-1p-sg
    I am walking

 b) kAvelenko       minA?
    walk-1p-sg-ques I-nom
    Am I walking?

 c) *minA kAvelenko

And the ditransitive verbs follow in suit:

4a) hAn        antaa      tomaattit  miehelle
    he/she-nom give-3p-sg tomato-acc man-allat
    He/she gives tomatoes to the man

 b) antaako         hAn        tomaattit  miehelle?
    give-3p-sg-ques he/she-nom tomato-acc man-allat
    Is he/she giving tomatoes to the man?

Matrix imperatives are simply the uninflected root of the verb,
that is to say, the form without the minA or sinA ending. A
typical phrase heard in Finnish is in the imperative (though it
uses the copula, and I've not yet implemented this particular
verb into my grammar):

5) ole    hyvAA (cannot be parsed)
   be-imp good-part
   be good!

An example of an intransitive imperative:

6) kAvele
   walk-imp
   walk!

Transitive verbs keep the same complements:

7) pelkAA    tomaattit
   fear-imp tomato-acc
   fear tomatoes!

8) sano ettA minA nAytAn apinalta
   say-imp comp i-nom look-1p-sg monkey-ablat
   say that i look like a monkey!

And ditransitives work as expected:

9) anna tuot tomaattit miehelle
   give-imp that-pl tomato-pl man-allat
   give those tomatoes to the man


Current coverage of imperatives

The intransitive 'kAvele' (walk!) currently works as expected,
however transitive and ditransitive verbs are parsing, but not
with correct structures.

I implemented imperatives by reinflecting the 2p-Sg form of the
verb (for instance, 'kAvelet' walk-2p-Sg) to remove the 't'
ending using the imp_verb-lex-rule, then the verb must go through
the imperative-head-opt-subj-phrase grammar rule so that it doesn't
need a subj, and finally it goes through the finnish-imperative-
clause grammar rule to get the semantics.

Parsing 'kAvele' provides 3 parses, but two would be removed if the
root condition lex-root was removed, thus giving the correct parse
with the root node being finnish-imperative. The only concern is that
the root node is being labeled 'V' (above an 'S') which leads me to
believe some information may be being in the finnish-imperative
rule.

The transitive and ditransitive seem to be connecting their
complements via head-adj-int, which projects to finnish-
declarative, as opposed to finnish-imperative. I think I need
to constrain head-adj-int to not allow head-dtr's with
[IMPERATIVE +], as well as modify my head-comp rule to correctly
grab the complements appropriate to transitive and ditransitive
verbs.

Current coverage of interrogatives

Matrix interrogatives are working well, though not perfectly. Certain
constructions are overgenerating (though this again seems to be due
to an underconstrained head-adj-int rule, as well as redundant
inflectional rules that differ in their case marking).

A working transitive:

10) pelkAAnko       minA  tomaattit
    fear-1p-sg-ques i-nom tomato-acc
    i fear tomatoes?

A working intransitive:

11) kAveleeko       hAn
    walk-3p-sg-ques he/she-nom
    he/she is walking?

A working (though overgenerating, through adj-head-int and head-adj-int)
ditransitive:

12) annanko minA tomaattit miehelle
    give-1p-sg-ques i-nom tomatoes man-allat
    i am giving tomatoes to the man?

The semantics of the matrix interrogatives closely match the example,
though they don't exactly match. The obvious differences are in the
order of the predications, given that Finnish inverts the subject
and the verb in questions. The only other obvious difference in
the semantic representation is that where there is an indefinite
predication in the English representation, my grammar has a
predsort. A representation for 'kAveleeko hAn' (is he/she walking?)
follows (lacking the predsort, but with a pronoun predication instead):

<h1, e2:SEMSORT:TENSE:ASPECT:MOOD,
{h3:_walk_v(e2, x4:SEMSORT:THIRD:SG:BOOL),
 h5:pronoun_n(x4),
 h6:pronoun_q(x4, h7, h8),
 h1:question_m(h9),
 h9:proposition_m(h10)},
{h7 qeq h5,
 h10 qeq h3}>

For embedded interrogative clauses, I treated the wh-like words,
such as the current word I have implemented, 'mitA' (what-like, and
partitive), as complementizers, as they show up in the same places,
for instance in the following sentence:

13) minA  tiedAn     mitA    sinA    syOt
    i-nom know-1p-sg wh-comp you-nom eat-2p-sg
    I know what you eat

(meta-discussion: it just occurred to me that mitA may not be the
type of embedded interrogative marker that is desired for this lab,
however the syntactic construction would be treated the same for
the appropriate marker which would create the sentence:

    'I know whether you eat'

mitA seems like it would be better handled by long-distance
dependency machinary. For the sake of sanity, I'm going to pretend
until tomorrow, 5-17, when I can ask my Finnish professor about
a corellate to 'whether' in Finnish, that mitA is the same.)

The semantics I was trying to implement with a non-branching rule
that almost directly mirrors the finnish-interrogative-clause. I
called this one a cp-interrogative-clause, but it doesn't seem to be
working. The current difference in the rule is that the HEAD-DTR's
HEAD must be of type comp. This can be fixed by changing cp-inter-
rogative-clause's HEAD-DTR's MSG to be of type message instead
of no-msg, but this creates a circular lexical rule, so I've left it
as type no-msg in order to parse sentences effectively.
