Katie Sickles
LING 567
Lab 6

	For this lab, the bulk of the work went into creating the
determiners. The determiners in Icelandic are mostly inflections
rather than separate words. I created the determiner suffix
heirarchy so that I could add the discourse status for the lab.
	I had to change around my noun declension heirarcy a little
to make them compatable with the determiner inflections. Mainly,
I needed to add a type specific for just gender and number
without class information or const/infl information. I also made
the noun declensions lexeme-to-lexeme inflections to add the 
determiner suffix. This created problems since, the nouns can
appear with out the determiner suffix.
	I solved this by adding a rule that made these lexemes any
num+case lexeme to word. This rule also added the discourse
information of [ COG-ST type-id ] since when a noun appears
without the determiner suffix it gets an indefinite interpretation.
	The determiner suffixes all give the definite interpretation,
so the top of the determiner inflection heirarchy adds the
[ COG-ST uniq+fam+act ] discourse status. I'm not sure if this
is correct or not, since the information of the inflections is
added to the nouns. There is also a problem now with the semantics.
No generation is happening, and when I look at the MRS, only the
first word is appearing. Somehow the semantics are being lost in
the lexical rules and I haven't yet figured out why. However, the
determiners are now being parsed correctly.
	For example, the sentences:
	
	Kotturinn elskar hundinn
	cat-masc-nom-noun.masc-nom-def love-3sg dog-masc-acc-noun.masc-acc-def
	
	Kottur elskar hund
	cat-masc-nom-noun.masc-nom-indef love-3sg dog-masc-acc-noun.masc-acc-indef
	
These are both parsed correctly and in viewing the chart nodes, 
all the lexical rules are applied correctly. Just somehow, the 
semantics are lost in the rules.
	For the argument optionality, I'm not exactly sure how it
works in Icelandic. As far as I can tell, I think it has the
object drop for certain verbs, similar to English, because I
know it doesn't fit the other options. However, I was unable to
find a concrete example of this. So I wrote a rule for this, but
was unable to get the LKB to load the grammar correctly for this.
The rule is in the icelandic.tdl file, but commented out so that
the grammar loads.
	For adjectives, I had to add another set of lexical rules.
The adjectives have to agree with the nouns they modify in case,
number and gender. This was added to the lexical rules by putting
constraints on the MOD valuse for each rule. There is also a
distinction in Icelandic between weak declension and strong
declension of adjectives. This is a hard distincition to implement
so I have just added in the weak declension for the moment, which
will get more coverage for my test suite.
	The adverbs are easier, since they are just fixed words. I
added in teh adverb-lex with no problems. However, when I added
an adverb to the lexicon, the grammar wouldn't load. I'm not sure
why this is happening, so I just commented out the adverb in the
lexicon. The negative adverb is working as expected though.
	Also, I still am undecided on how to handle the cl4 masc nouns.
The nom declension of _man_n_rel is "maður", while the accusative
is "mann". At first I was tempted to just represent the nom as
"mann-ur". This works for _man_r_rel, but other cl4 nouns don't
work this way. It seems like it might be good for this class to
have fixed cases in the lexicon.

note: I have the baseline tsdb in the tar file, but when I tried
to run it on the new grammar, I was only able to come up with
a null test suite, so I have not included that in the submission.