Katie Sickles
LING 567
Lab2

Icelandic, Íslenska
Language Code: isl

Pronouns:
	
	Pronouns in Icelandic vary by person, number, gender, case
and familiarity. I have a chart below representing the pronouns
of the language. I have given all the cases for 1st person, and
used just the nominative case for the other persons.
	
	1st Person:
	
		Singular	Familiar Pl.	Polite Pl.
	
nom.	ég			við				vér
acc.	mig			okkur			oss
dat.	mér			okkur			oss
gen. 	mín			okkar			vor

	2nd Person:
	
nom.	þú			þið				þér

	3rd Person (nominative only):
	
		Singular	Plural
		
masc.	hann		þeir
fem.	hún			þær
neut.	það			þau		

	These pronouns have to match the verbs in agreement 
with the number and person. Such as the example below:

	Ég hoppa
	I  jump.1sg
	
	*Við hoppa
	 We   jump.1sg
	 
Determiners:

	Icelandic does not have a indefinite article, only the
definite one. There are two different kinds of the definite
article: a free one, and a suffixed one.

	Free:		hinn gódi maður
				the good man
		
	Suffixed:	gódi maður-inn
				the good man
			
	The free aricle can only appear if there is an adjective in
the sentence. If there is no adjective present, the suffixed
version has to be used:

	Maðurinn líkar mig
	the man likes me
	
	*Hinn maður líkar mig
	the man likes me
	
	The articles also have agreement with case, gender, person
and number. This is true of both free and suffixed articles. The 
chart below illustrates some of the different suffixed articles:

		Gender	Singular	Plural
	
nom.	masc.	hestur-inn	hestar-nir
acc.	masc.	hest-inn	hesta-na
dat.	masc.	hesti-num	hestu-num
nom.	fem.	kinn-in		kinnar-nar
acc.	fem.	kinn-ina	kinnar-nar
dat.	fem.	kinn-inni	kinnu-num

	When no determiner is present, it is either a proper noun or
an indefinite article.

Case:

	Icelandic has four cases: nominative, accusative, dative, and
genitive. The nominative case is generally used for the subject of
a sentence as in English and accusative is used as the object of
transitive verbs. There are also some verbs that require the subject
to be accusative as well. Here are some examples:

	Ég líka manninn
	I.NOM like the man.ACC
	
	*Ég líka maðurinn
	I.NOM like the man.NOM
	
	Mig dreymdi draum
	I.ACC dreamt a dream.ACC
	
	The dative case is used in indirect objects (also like English),
but there are verbs that have the direct object as dative. Genitive
case is mostly used in possesives, but is also used in measurement.
	The cases in Icelandic have these distributions and must remain
in the proper distribution to form grammatical sentences.

Agreement:

	There is very strong agreement in Icelandic. So far it has been
used in almost all of the categories above. Gender, number, and person
have to agree for determiners and their nouns. Number and person have 
to agree for verbs and their pronouns or nouns.

	Maðurinn líkar mig
	the man likes me

	*Maðurin líkar mig
	the.FEM man.MASC likes me
	
Adjectives:

	Unlike English, the adjectives in Icelandic have case and number.
These also have to follow agreement with their nouns. They also appear
right before the noun they are modifying. The chart shows some of the
strong forms of the adjective "fagur"-beautiful, fair.

		Singular	
		
		Masc.	Fem.	Neut.
nom.	fagur	fögur	fagurt
acc.	fagran	fagra	fagurt

		Plural
		
		Masc.	Fem.	Neut.
nom.	fagrir	fagrar	fögur
acc.	fagra	fagrar	fögur

These strong forms are used mostly with indeterminate nouns. However, there
are also weak forms that are used with definite article. For example:

	rauðer hunder
	a red dog
	
	rauði hunderinn
	the red dog	
	
	*hinn rauðer hunder
	the red.STONG dog
	
Final Note: In this write-up, I am still in the process of learning the grammar
	of Icelandic. There many times when writing this and the testsuite I thought
	a sentence was grammatical and later found out it was not. I am pretty sure
	that what I have represented now has the correct grammatical judgements, but
	as I am not a native speaker, I have yet to do more research to guarantee
	that the judgements are correct.

	

	
