Katie Sickles
LING 567
Lab 9

FIXES:
	Auxilliary verbs can now be formed into questions as well. I fixed this by 
	creating a creating a supertype of the verb lex rules called verb-lex-rules.
	The inversion lex rule requires verb-lex-rules as it's daughter.
	
		get eg borda gler
		can.1sg I eat.1sg glass.NEUT.SG.ACC
		'can I eat glass?'
		
	The bare-np phrase now has the pred value of "_exist_q_rel" instead of
	"unspec_q_rel" which is what it was before. The MRS now is coming out right.
	
	The negative adverb had a problem where it could attach at the VP level as
	well as the VP level. I fixed this problem by having a non-empty SUBJ cons.
	This sentence will now only get one (correct) parse:
	
		eg hoppa ekki
		I jump1.sg not
		'I don't jump'
	
	The new phrase types that I added to icelandic.tdl for imperatives, ditransitives
	and optional objects weren't working because I forgot to put them in the
	rules.tdl file as rule instances. When I did this for imperatives, everything
	could go throught the imp-lex-rules. I constrained this by having verb-lex-rules
	(created earlier for neg question fix) make the verb FORM fin, thus making it
	incompatable with the imp-lex-rules. For some reason the imperatives are getting
	three parses. It looks like the subject inversion for questions is applying and
	allowing for obj-drop. I can't figure out why this is happening since all verbs
	explicitly constrain OPT - except the ones that can have optional objects.
	
	For the opt-trans-verb-lex I first created the rule in rules.tdl. This then
	allowed for the object to optional, but on all verbs now. I had to explicitly
	contrain the COMPS as OPT - on all the trans-verbs. This part of the grammar
	now works.
	
		eg borda
		I eat.1sg
		'I eat'
		
	The ditransitive verbs also had to have the rule added to the rules.tdl. Then
	I constrained the COMPS to be direct object accusative, and indirect as dative.
	The indirect had to be constrained as OPT - to prevent the indirect object from
	being optional. I had to then make the dat case lexical rules and determiners
	for this work.
	
		kona-in gefa-ar stulka-u-ina kott-i
		woman.FEM.NOM-the.FEM.NOM give.3sg girl.FEM-ACC-the.FEM.ACC cat.MASC-DAT
		'the woman gave the girl a cat'
		
	In general I also had to expand my lexicon and finish all the suffixes for all
	the genders and determiners.
	
MT EXAMPLES:
	Here are some examples that should work for the MT
	
	kott-ur-inn elska-ar hund-inn
	cat.MASC-MASC.NOM-the.MASC.NOM love.3sg dog.MASC.ACC-the.MASC.ACC
	'the cat loves the dog'
	
	eg get borda gler
	I can.1sg eat.1sg glass.NEUT.ACC
	'I can eat glass'
	
	tad meida-ar ekki mig
	it hurt.3sg not me
	'it doesn't hurt me'
	
	kona-in gefa-ar stulka-u-ina kott-i
	woman.FEM.NOM-the.FEM.NOM give.3sg girl.FEM-ACC-the.FEM.ACC cat.MASC-DAT
	'the woman gave the girl a cat'
	
	eg heyra ad gul-i kott-ur-inn mjalma-ar
	I hear.1sg that yellow-MASC.NOM cat.MASC-NOM-the.MASC.NOM meow.3sg
	'I hear that the yellow cat meows'
	
MT TRANSFER:
	I was attempting to translate from Icelandic to Zulu. I never got this
	working. I tried changing some things in my grammar to be compatible,
	but I still would get the 'Problem in create-liszt-fs-from-rels'. It
	seems that the GEND feature isn't being stripped. I'm not sure why this
	happening because it is in the mt.lsp as being stripped. So I wasn't
	able to get any sentences to translate to Zulu.