Linguistics 567, Spring 2005, Jonathan Pool
Lab 4 (Esperanto)

Preparation

Subject optionality: Esperanto (as I interpret it) does not permit
systematic (i.e. ubiquitous) omission of the sentential subject. Many
verbs may be used without subjects, when there is no semantic subject,
such as "malfruas" ('It's late') and "varmas" ('It's hot'), but a
semantic subject, even if identifiable without ambiguity, may not be
omitted.

Object optionality: Esperanto permits systematic omission of the
sentential direct object, but no uniform inference about feature
values of the omitted object is possible.

Object indefinite null instantiation: A default inference about an
omitted object of an intrinsically transitive verb is that the object
is indefinite. For some verb-context combinations, a definite focal
object is inferred, instead.

Subject indefinite null instantiation: Esperanto does not permit
systematic indefinite null instantiation of subjects. This seems to be
inferrable from the first proposition above. The indefinite personal
pronoun is used instead.

Unexpressed PP arguments: Some PP arguments in Esperanto are omitted,
normally when they are part of the common information assumed shared
by speaker and hearer. E.g., "la reĝo [de Anglujo]" ('the king [of
England]).

Ditransitive Verbs

Sentences added to test suite for ditransitive verbs:

*tiu  lernanto    igos     min freneza
;that student-NOM make-FUT me  crazy-SG-NOM
;'That student is going to drive me crazy.'
;Marked ungrammatical although actually grammatical, because grammar
;doesn't account for NP AP ditransitive verbs yet.

*tiu lernanto     igos     min frenezaj
;that student-NOM make-FUT me  crazy-PL-NOM

la   regxo    igos     min hundo
;the king-NOM make-FUT me  dog-NOM
;'The king is going to turn me into a dog.'
;'A dog will make me the king.'
;Ambiguous; 2 parses should exist.

igos      min hundo   la  regxo
;make-FUT me  dog-NOM the king-NOM 
;'The king is going to turn me into a dog.'
;'A dog will make me the king.'
;Ambiguous; 2 parses should exist.

*la  regxo    igos     min hundon
;the king-NOM make-FUT me  dog-ACC

la   lernantoj    miaj      hundojn  supozas     regxoj
;the students-NOM my-PL-NOM dogs-ACC assume-PRES kings-NOM
;'My students assume dogs are kings.'
;'Kings assume dogs are my students.'
;Ambiguous; 2 parses should exist.

*la  lernantoj    miaj      hundoj   supozas     regxoj
;the students-NOM my-PL-NOM dogs-NOM assume-PRES kings-NOM

*ni havas     hundon  regxo
;we have-PRES dog-ACC king-NOM

*mi kuiras    farunon   pano
;I  cook-PRES flour-ACC bread-NOM

mi igos     farunon   pano
;I make-FUT flour-ACC bread-NOM
;'I'll turn flour into bread.'

These sentences test whether the grammar accepts ditransitive verbs
only with two NP complements, of which one is nominative and one is
accusative, and whether it accepts sentences with such complements
only when the verb is ditransitive. They also verify that the verb and
its 3 arguments may appear in various (actually, any) order. Finally,
they test that the grammar recognizes double-NP ditransitive sentences
as ambiguous, because the subject and one complement are both
nominative, and they can't be definitively distinguished by
constituent order.

Ditransitive verbs more often take adjectival and prepositional
complements. To account for adjectival complements we need to specify
that they are nominative but agree with the NP complement in number.

Argument Optionality

Subjects are not optional, but complements generally are
optional. Their omission is rare and awkward with some verbs, which
might be interpreted as requiring expressed complements. I am doing
that in the case of "havi" ('have') to assure that the grammar can
account for any such verb that might be interpreted to exist.

It is arguable that no omitted complement of any particular verb can
be guaranteed to have a uniform definiteness value. However, I have
selected particular verbs to be treated as having omitted complements
of uniform definiteness, to assure that the grammar can account for
such verbs if they are deemed to exist. For example, I am analyzing
"legi" ('read') as non-uniform, "kuiri" ('cook') as uniformly
indefinite, and "supozi" ('assume') as uniformly definite.

To account for argument optionality, I defined these lexical types and
made one of them the supertype of each transitive verb:

trans-verb-lex: optional complement, nonuniform definiteness if omitted

ini-comp-trans-verb-lex: optional complement, indefinite if omitted

dni-comp-trans-verb-lex: optional complement, definite if omitted

comp-trans-verb-lex: mandatory complement

To test for argument optionality, I used these sentences:

ili kuiras
;they perform-cooking-PRES
;'They are cooking.'

ili   kuiras    hundojn
;they cook-PRES dogs-ACC
;'They are cooking dogs.'

mi supozas
;I assume-PRES
;'I suppose.'

mi gxin   supozas
;I it-ACC assume-PRES
;'I suppose so.'

*gxin   supozas
;it-ACC assume-PRES

ni  havas regxon
;we have  king-ACC
;'We have a king.'

*ni havas
;we have

*ni havas regxo
;we have  king-NOM

*ni havas hundon  regxo
;we have  dog-ACC king-NOM

These sentences test whether the grammar assigns one structure to each
grammatical sentence and none to each nongrammatical sentence. One of
the verbs, "supozi" ('assume'), is also ditransitive, but ditransitive
verbs in this language have only mandatory arguments, so the sentences
with "supozi" also test that the grammar analyzes this verb only as an
instance of dni-comp-trans-verb-lex when it has less than three
arguments. Two of these sentences, namely the grammatical sentences
with omitted complements, also test for the grammar's analysis of the
definiteness value of the omitted complement. The feature structure of
the V parent of the verb contains the correct "+" or "-" value of
SYNSEM.LOCAL.CAT.VAL.COMPS.FIRST.LOCAL.CONT.HOOK.INDEX.DEF.

I have not discovered any discrepancies between the expected and the
actual performance of the grammar.

Modification

Adjective Facts

Adjectives in Esperanto may modify nouns, including
pronouns. Adjectives may precede or follow the nouns that they modify,
and if a noun is modified by multiple adjectives some may precede it
while others follow it. Generally, a determiner if present precedes
all adjectives and the noun.

However, split NPs are found, as in:

kukon    mi neniam gustumis   tiom      dolĉan
cake-ACC I  never  taste-PAST that-much sweet-SG-ACC
I've never tasted cake this sweet.

ju pli vi strebos, des pli brilan vi akiros sukceson
the more you-NOM strive-FUT the more brilliant-SG-ACC you acquire-FUT
success-SG-ACC
The more you strive, the more brilliant success you'll achieve.

So are embedded determiners, as in:

la kalumnio portas sian langon la venenan rapide de poluso al poluso
the slander-NOM carry-PRES its-REFL-ACC tongue-ACC the
poisonous-SG-ACC rapidly from pole-SG-NOM to pole-SG-NOM
The poisonous tongue of slander darts from pole to pole.

I am temporarily defining these constructions as ungrammatical in the
variety of Esperanto described by the grammar being developed.

Adjectives are inflected for number and case and agree with the nouns
they modify or express predications about. Adjectival inflection is
fully productive: Any stem not yet inflected for part of speech can be
inflected as an adjective. This includes stems that can be used as
words without inflection. For example, "en" ('in') is a preposition
when uninflected, but when inflected adjectivally it becomes "ena"
('internal').

A closed set of lexemes can be analyzed as adjectives without
inflection. These are the lexemes in the "correlative" table ending in
"-a" and "-u", such as "tia" ('such'), "kiu" ('which'). These are
entire morphemes, rather than adjectivally inflected stems, because
what look like their stems aren't productively inflectable; for
example, "kii" isn't a verb (however, stems are sometimes back-formed
and then inflected).

Possessive pronouns obey the morphology of adjectives and may be used
adjectivally, though when used prenominally they are usually
interpreted as alternating with definite determiners.

Rare cases of multiple-part-of-speech inflection are attested. For
example, the lexeme "viv" ('life/live') has been found inflected as an
imperative verb, "vivu", used as a quasi-lexeme with the meaning
'toast to one's health', and further inflected, e.g., as an adjective
"vivua" ('relating to a toast'). Provisionally, I am choosing to treat
such inflections as ungrammatical or to treat any such case as a case
in which the initial inflection has evolved into an unanalyzed
stem. The same solution can apply when quasi-stems in the correlative
table become secondarily treated as ordinary lexemes.

Adverb Facts

A small fixed set of bare adverbs exists. In addition, adverbial
inflection is fully productive in the same manner as adjectival
inflection; thus, any stem, even a bare-adverb stem, can be inflected
for adverbial part of speech. Any adverb that has been inflected for
part of speech can is then inflected for nominative or accusative
case.

Adverbs can modify lexical and phrasal nominal, pronominal, verbal,
adjectival, prepositional, and adverbial constituents. The case of an
adverb does not agree with the case of any other constituent.

Copular qualitative predications about clauses are made with
adverbs. For example:

manĝi   po             ok    ovojn    tage    ŝajnas/estas      stulte
eat-INF at-the-rate-of eight eggs-ACC day-ADV seem-PRES/be-PRES stupid-ADV
Eating eight eggs a day seems/is stupid.

Adverbial word order is problematic. Because of the multiple parts of
speech they can modify and the lack of agreement of adverbs, unless
their locations determine their attachments their attachments can be
highly ambiguous. Speakers usually use and interpret adverbs as
attached to constituents that immediately follow them (see PAG,
pp. 363-364). There appear to be some significant exceptions. One is
that the emphatic uninflected adverb "mem" ('myself/yourself/...')
appears immediately after the word or phrase it emphasizes. Another is
that adverbs qualifying verbal nouns appear after them, as in "la voja
ĝo teren" ('the trip earthward'). Another is that adverbial phrases,
particularly heavy ones and ones in the accusative case, can appear
sentence-finally when attached to a preceding VP. It might seem
reasonable to enshrine the general rule and these exceptions as
definitive. This would correctly make these sentences equivalent:

li parolas    tro laŭte
he speak-PRES too loud-ADV
He speaks too loud.

li tro laŭte    parolas
he too loud-ADV speak-PRES
He speaks too loud.

But it would incorrectly exclude as grammatical a third, likewise
equivalent, sentence:

tro laŭte    li parolas
too loud-ADV he speak-PRES
He speaks too loud.

Solving this problem by liberating adverbial word order would create
another problem by predicting ambiguity that in fact does not exist,
as in:

nur li parolis
only he speak-PAST
Only he spoke.

which cannot be interpreted to mean 'He merely spoke', because, unlike
"laŭte", "nur" is consistently attached to an immediately following
non-sentential constituent.

Another exception is illustrated in the above example where the adverb
in "po ok ovojn tage" ('eight eggs a day') is attached to its left.

Certain adverbs are interpreted as sentential modifiers in some
contexts. Those adverbs are not always unambiguously sentential,
however. For example, "kredeble" ('believably') is also used in the
senses of 'apparently' and 'probably', so

kredeble       li parolis
believable-ADV he speak-PAST
 
or

li kredeble       parolis
he believable-ADV speak-PAST

could both mean either 'He spoke believably' or 'He probably
spoke'. (And the first of these could also mean 'It's probably he that
spoke'.)

Speakers wanting to avoid this ambiguity can place the adverb
sentence-finally for VP attachment and sentence-initially to maximize
the probability of sentential interpretation, or can assure a
sentential interpretation by reformulating the adverb as a verb, as in

kredeblas       ke   li parolis
believable-PRES that he speak-PAST
It's probable that he spoke.

Suppose we develop the adverbial grammar incrementally. What
generalization can we begin with to achieve the greatest coverage? The
best candidate appears to be a generalization that every adverbial
phrase is attached to some specifier-discharged constituent
immediately to its right, with no constraint on the part of speech of
that constituent's head, and with all adverbs belonging to a normal or
bare inflectional subtype, with these subtypes not differing with
respect to word order. I'll adopt that pattern as the first
approximation.

Adjective Types

I have defined a type, all-adjective-lex, to contain the features and
values shared by all adjectives. It has two subtypes: adjective-lex
and bare-adjective-lex. The former covers adjectival lexemes that must
be adjectivally inflected before being usable as words. The latter
covers lexemes that have null inflection for the adjective part of
speech. They differ in the value of their feature NEEDINF, which is
appropriate for any subtype of word-or-lexrule and whose values tell
what kind of inflection the lexeme is ready for. Ordinary adjectival
lexemes (adjective-lex) are licensed for use as adjectives only after
being inflected for part of speech, then number, and then case. The
closed set of bare adjectives (bare-adjective-lex) skips
part-of-speech inflection and must be inflected for number and then
case.

Adverb Types

I have defined a type, all-adverb-lex, to contain the features and
values shared by all adverbs. It has two subtypes: adverb-lex and
bare-adverb-lex. The former covers adjectival lexemes that must be
adverbially inflected before being usable as words. The latter covers
lexemes that have null inflection for the adverb part of speech. They
differ in the value of their feature NEEDINF. Ordinary adverbial
lexemes (adverb-lex) are licensed for use as adverbs only after being
inflected for part of speech, then case. The closed set of bare
adverbs (bare-adverb-lex) requires no inflection.

Intersectivity versus Scopality

On the suggestion of Christie Evans, I am surmising that the wide
valence of adverbs described above is due in part or in whole to my
inclusion of adverbs with scopal semantics in the test suite. Phrases
such as "rapide biciklo" ('rapidly bicycle') may be impossible to
interpret, and it may be useful to treat them as ungrammatical by
defining adverb (and adjective) subtypes to distinguish scopal from
intersective lexemes and limit the latter's valences more greatly than
the former's.

Testing

Adjectives have been included in prior testing, because they were
necessary for a grammar that would account for agreement.

Adverbs have not previously been included in the test suite. These
items test for the grammar's predictions on sentences containing
adverbs:

legas      nepre        junaj        lernantoj;read-PRES definite-ADV young-PL-NOM students-NOM;'Students that read are for sure the young ones.';'For sure it's young students that read.;Ambiguous; 2 parses should exist.*legas     nepr       junaj        lernantoj;read-PRES definite-0 young-PL-NOM students-NOMnepre         legas     junaj        lernantoj;definite-ADV read-PRES young-PL-NOM students-NOM;'It's absolutely true that young students read.';'Young students definitely read.';Ambiguous; 2 parses should exist.nepre         junaj        lernantoj    legas;definite-ADV young-PL-NOM students-NOM read-PRES ;'Students that read are for sure the young ones.';'For sure it's young students that read.;'It's absolutely true that young students read.';Ambiguous; 3 parses should exist.nepre         la  junaj        lernantoj    legas;definite-ADV the young-PL-NOM students-NOM read-PRES ;'For sure it's the young students that read.;'It's absolutely true that (the) young students read.';Ambiguous; 2 parses should exist.*legas     junaj        lernantoj     nepre;read-PRES definite-0 young-PL-NOM students-NOM

Some limitations in the grammar's coverage vis-a-vis modification
facts in Esperanto as actually used have been described above, and
these are demonstrated in the results of testing against the revised
test suite.

I have encountered, however, one unexpected failure of the grammar
that I have not yet been able to debug. The grammar is incorrectly
dealing with adverbial inflection. One manifestation of this defect is
that uninflected ordinary adverbs, such as "nepr" (definite-0), do not
cause the grammar to reject an otherwise grammatical sentence. Another
is that the grammar is combining ordinary adverbs with their modified
constituents before the adverbs are inflected for case. Case
inflections are performed, but case-inflected adverbs are not used in
the construction of the parental phrase.

I could not cure this defect simply by declaring uninflected adverbs
to be INFLECTED -, similarly to adjectives, because this would only
stop less than fully inflected adverbs from being used in parental
phrases. It would not cause fully inflected adverbs to get used. My
attempts to diagnose this defect have included inspecting the feature
structures of the adj-head-int nodes and the nom-adv-lri or
acc-adv-lri nodes that should be their non-head daughters, and also
the unification of the fully inflected adverbial nodes with the values
of ARGS.FIRST of the adj-head-int rule. I expected these to fail to
unify and reveal a problem, because the rule isn't using the fully
inflected adverb, but they did unify.
